codegen.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Code Generation Assignment
---

# Code Generation Assignment

## Objectives

- To build a native code generator for a procedural language.
- To demonstrate competence in X86-64 assembly language.
- To solve common problems in register allocation and expression translation.
- To gain experience in incremental software development.

## Overview

Finally, you will complete your compiler by adding a code generator!
We have discussed code generation extensively in class,
so this assignment won't specify it in too much detail.
The goal is simple: Your compiler must read in a B-minor program
as described by the [language guide](bminor)
and emit an 64-bit X86 assembly language program that can be
assembled, linked, and run correctly on the CSE student machines.

## Requirements

Please review the [general requirements](general) for assignments.
Your final submission must have a Makefile that generates an executable
called `bminor` that can be invoked like this:

```
% bminor --codegen program.bminor program.s
```

If the program passes all earlier phases of compiling
(scanning, parsing, resolving, and typechecking) then it should
write a valid assembly language program to the file specified in the third argument
and exit with status zero.
If some error is encountered along the way, then it must print a reasonable error and exit with status one.

Your compiled programs will need a runtime library to operate correctly.
Use the `library.c` provided with the B-minor starter files as a starting point.
Note that a print statement in B-Minor should result in one or more calls
to the C functions `print_string`, `print_integer`, etc, depending on the type of the expression
You may add additional additional runtime calls as you see fit.

To convert assembly code into a working executable, use GCC in assembly mode and include the B-minor standard library:

```
gcc -g myprogram.s library.c -o myprogram
```

Then execute the final program like this:

```
./myprogram
```

It's quite possible that this final stage of the project
will require you do go back and make a few changes to earlier stages.
Do what you need to do in order to get the code working!
The assembly code that you produce must work correctly, but it need not be simple, pretty, or optimal.

## Baseline Requirements

You may make the following simplifying assumptions for your code generator and receive full credit:

- Due to the large number of X86-64 registers, you may use a simple non-spilling register allocator,
and fail with an "out of registers" error on really complicated nested expressions.
- To keep the calling conventions simple, calls to functions with more than six arguments may fail with a "too many arguments" error.
- Only one-dimensional arrays of integers of constant size at global scope must be implemented.
Arrays of other types, or arrays as parameters or local variables may fail with an "array not implemented" error.
- Floating point types may fail code generation with an "floating not not supported" error.

The baseline compiler should be tagged as `codegen`.

## Extra Credit Options

Once you have **perfected** the baseline compiler, then you may attempt one of options for up to 10 percent extra credit.

- Implement support for floating point values.  It should be possible to declare and use floating point values
at global scope, local scope, in function paramers, in arrays, in expressions, and in print statements.
Conversion between integers and floating point is not required.  See these [notes on floating point](float) to get started.
- Implement support for dynamically allocated and checked arrays.  Arrays declared at local scope may have a size determined
at runtime.  This requires that the array be allocated using `malloc`.  The size of the array should be stored in the first
cell, so that the `array_length` operator can return the actual size, and array lookups should be checked for valid bounds.

Any extra credit attempted should be tagged as `codegen-extracredit`

## Hints

Start by writing a bunch of *very* simple programs,
and then write just enough of the code generator to cover those cases.
For example, write a test that declares one variable (and nothing else),
or returns a single constant value from main.
Work up bit by bit to handle integer arithmetic, then control statements, function calls, and so forth.
When you are ready for a challenge, try these [complete example programs](https://github.com/dthain/compilerbook-examples/tree/master/tests/codegen)

## Testing

As with the previous step, create twenty good test cases named `test/codegen/good[0-19].bminor`
that consist of valid B-minor programs.
Make sure that your test cases start with very simple examples and work up to
complex examples with complex expressions, control flow statements, and functions.
(You tested all the bad cases in previous stages, so you don't need to include bad cases now.)

As always, exercise good style in programming by choosing sensible
variable names, breaking complex tasks down into smaller functions,
and using constructive comments where appropriate.

Ensure that `make clean`, `make`, and `make test`, and continue to work properly.

## Development Log

For each stage of the compiler, add a new section to `devel.md` with a few thoughts on building this stage:
- What AI tools (if any) did you use, and what sort of prompts did you provide?
- What parts of the code were easy to get right?
- What parts were difficult to get right and required more effort?

## Turning In

**Tag your submission with `codegen` in github to turn in.**  If you have attempted extra credit, then tag that additionally as `codegen-extracredit`.

Your submission will be tested on the CSE student Linux machines,
so be sure to follow the [general instructions](general) and make
sure that your code works there.

Your grade on this project will be based upon:

- Continued correctness on previous stages. (10 percent)
- General structure and completeness of the code generation stage. (40 percent)
- Correctness of your test cases. (20 percent)
- Correctness on our test cases. (20 percent)
- Good programming style. (10 percent)
 
The final code generator is due **Thursday, Dec 7th at 11:59PM**.  Late assignments are not accepted.

Commit message:

Add final exam and codegen.

codegen.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Code Generation Assignment
---

# Code Generation Assignment

## Objectives

- To build a native code generator for a procedural language.
- To demonstrate competence in X86-64 assembly language.
- To solve common problems in register allocation and expression translation.
- To gain experience in incremental software development.

## Overview

Finally, you will complete your compiler by adding a code generator!
We have discussed code generation extensively in class,
so this assignment won't specify it in too much detail.
The goal is simple: Your compiler must read in a B-minor program
as described by the [language guide](bminor)
and emit an 64-bit X86 assembly language program that can be
assembled, linked, and run correctly on the CSE student machines.

## Requirements

Please review the [general requirements](general) for assignments.
Your final submission must have a Makefile that generates an executable
called `bminor` that can be invoked like this:

```
% bminor --codegen program.bminor program.s
```

If the program passes all earlier phases of compiling
(scanning, parsing, resolving, and typechecking) then it should
write a valid assembly language program to the file specified in the third argument
and exit with status zero.
If some error is encountered along the way, then it must print a reasonable error and exit with status one.

Your compiled programs will need a runtime library to operate correctly.
Use the `library.c` provided with the B-minor starter files as a starting point.
Note that a print statement in B-Minor should result in one or more calls
to the C functions `print_string`, `print_integer`, etc, depending on the type of the expression
You may add additional additional runtime calls as you see fit.

To convert assembly code into a working executable, use GCC in assembly mode and include the B-minor standard library:

```
gcc -g myprogram.s library.c -o myprogram
```

Then execute the final program like this:

```
./myprogram
```

It's quite possible that this final stage of the project
will require you do go back and make a few changes to earlier stages.
Do what you need to do in order to get the code working!
The assembly code that you produce must work correctly, but it need not be simple, pretty, or optimal.

## Simplifying Requirements

You may make the following simplifying assumptions for your code generator and receive full credit:

- Due to the large number of X86-64 registers, you may use a simple non-spilling register allocator,
and fail with an "out of registers" error on really complicated nested expressions.
- Calls to functions with more than six arguments may fail with a "too many arguments" error.
- Arrays at local scope and multi-dimensional arays may fail with an error of "not implemented".  (However, you must support global one-dimensional arrays (and carrays) and passing arrays (and carrays) as function arguments.)
- Floating point types may fail code generation with an "floating point not not supported" error.

## Hints

Start by writing a bunch of *very* simple programs,
and then write just enough of the code generator to cover those cases.
For example, write a test that declares one variable (and nothing else),
or returns a single constant value from main.
Work up bit by bit to handle integer arithmetic, then control statements, function calls, and so forth.
When you are ready for a challenge, try these [complete example programs](https://github.com/dthain/compilerbook-examples/tree/master/tests/codegen)

## Testing

As with the previous step, create twenty good test cases named `test/codegen/good[0-19].bminor`
that consist of valid B-minor programs.
Make sure that your test cases start with very simple examples and work up to
complex examples with complex expressions, control flow statements, and functions.
(You tested all the bad cases in previous stages, so you don't need to include bad cases now.)

As always, exercise good style in programming by choosing sensible
variable names, breaking complex tasks down into smaller functions,
and using constructive comments where appropriate.

Ensure that `make clean`, `make`, and `make test`, and continue to work properly.

## Development Log

For each stage of the compiler, add a new section to `devel.md` with a few thoughts on building this stage:
- What AI tools (if any) did you use, and what sort of prompts did you provide?
- What parts of the code were easy to get right?
- What parts were difficult to get right and required more effort?

## Turning In

**Tag your submission with `codegen` in github to turn in.**  If you have attempted extra credit, then tag that additionally as `codegen-extracredit`.

Your submission will be tested on the CSE student Linux machines,
so be sure to follow the [general instructions](general) and make
sure that your code works there.

Your grade on this project will be based upon:

- Continued correctness on previous stages. (10 percent)
- General structure and completeness of the code generation stage. (30 percent)
- Correctness of your test cases. (20 percent)
- Correctness on our test cases. (30 percent)
- Good programming style. (10 percent)
 
The final code generator is due **Wednesday, Dec 10th at 11:59PM**.
We are not permitted to run assignments into exam week, so there will be no extensions.
